# Jekyll/Liquid Resume Generator 

### Overview and Initial Setup:
This Resume Generator uses Jekyll to generate a static website, then can automatically turn that website into a PDF with Google Chrome's Print-to-PDF function. </br>
For a simple guide to installing and using Jekyll see the [Jekyll Step by Step Tutorial](https://jekyllrb.com/docs/step-by-step/01-setup/).


### Basic Structure Terminology:
Each resume has three layers of content, starting from the top level: 
1. **Elements**, e.g. Education or Projects, which are made up of Sections. Elements are generated from Template files that are stored in the "_includes" directories. 
2. **Section Entries**, e.g. Calculator Webpage or Financial Trade Message Router, each of which is composed of a number of: Data Entries. 
3. **Data Entries**, e.g. Position or Dates. Data is stored in "_data" directories in either .yml or .json files. 

### Basic Function:
This Resume Generator is designed around several core principles:
1. **DEFAULT content**: All data (_data), templates (_includes), and styles (_sass) in the root directory will generate a 'default' or generic version of themselves from which all other more specific resumes content can be derived. Due to the way the "Resume Source Directory," i.e. the resume directory, is selected in the Resume config file, when the resume is generated these default, data, templates, and styles will be used **unless** there are any Resume specific versions of those same files in the resume's directory (see "Auto-Addition of Modified Files" below) </br>
The two resumes "_baseResume" and "_shortResume" are both intended to be 'generic' resumes generated with only this default data (though "_shortResume" is intended to restrict its contents to keep to a length of a single page). 
2. **Resume Directories**: The resume for each individual company/position is put under the _Resumes directory, e.g. "_baseResume" and "_shortResume". This allows the each resume to keep its own contents, i.e. its own _data, _includes, and _sass separate from all other resumes.
3. **Auto-Addition of Modified Files**: If any new data files, templates, or stylesheets are added to a specific resume's directory, the resume setup/generation program, CreateResumes.sh, will make sure the modified files replace, or in the case of stylesheets add onto, their default equivalents when the resume is generated. For example, if a different template were created for the Education Element (i.e. educationTemplate.html) of the file (say one that places the school below the summary) and placed it in that resumes _includes directory under the same name (i.e. educationTemplate.html), it would automatically replace the default Education Element when the resume was generated. </br>
4. **Switches for Minor Changes**: All minor changes to the default structure of a resume are accomplishable with Switches. These changes include, removing Elements from the resume, removing Sections from each Element and modifying the contents of each Section. Essentially, anything that could predictably need to be dynamically added or changed in the 'default' resume has a switch. </br>
These Switches are YAML Jekyll 'front matter variables' that are placed between the two sets of three dashes (--- ---) at the top of the index.md file of a resume. These can be added, tweaked, or removed at leisure and left in place to preserve the exact structure desired for a resume. ***This means that the index.md file is the main place where a resume's contents will be modified and is effectively another "configuration" file. Hence why the content of the page (i.e. the resume's content) is pushed off to the "resumeContent.html" file in the _includes directory, so that index.md can be mainly devoted to this "configuration" without any distractions***. </br>
For more on Switches see the Switches section below. For the full list of switches see the "ResumeSwitches.yml" file under the "_supplementalFiles" directory. 

**Other Notes**:
* This system is set up such that the project 'root' is technically where Jekyll is generating the 'website' from, but as there is no index.md file in root it looks in the directories 'included' by the Resume config file, i.e. the "Resume Source Directory".

### Resume Switches:
All resumes generated by this project are assumed to roughly follow the same basic set assumptions: the exact contents of a Section or Element may change but what those Sections/Elements are and the internal order of those Sections/Elements will not. If a particular Data Entry is included at all, it will necessarily have title, position, location, dates, etc. but the contents of the other pre-set Data Entries, highlights, links, summary etc. can be added/removed at will. Switches exist to modify what is included in the base format, but not to fundamentally restructure it. </br>
Hence most switches are for removing default Sections (generally prefixed with "skip"), with a handful that add/modify items that may be desired for certain resumes, e.g. like a title on the highlights portion of a Data Entry (generally prefixed with "include"). The third primary category of switches are more complicated YAML objects prefixed with "modified". These Switches allow for the exact content of each individual section in an Element to be set, e.g. the most notable project can be set to include all Data Entries, while keeping all other projects down to just the essentials to save space. </br>
All switches are YAML Jekyll 'front matter variables' that are placed between the two sets of three dashes (--- ---) at the top of the index.md file of a resume. Thanks to the --livereload Jekyll command these can be changed on the fly by adding/changing a switch in the front matter and saving index.md to apply the change. </br>
A Resume is made up of four layers of Switches: 
1. **Section Data Entry Switches**: These switches control a Section's contents, i.e. its Entry Data, such as a project's summary or highlights. Data switches do not cover Section titles, dates, etc. as it is presumed that if the section is going to be included at all these will necessarily be included. </br>
Default behavior is for all Data Entries in a Section to be included (except for some specific data entries such as the "Education Detail List," which are by default not included). Hence the main switches for changing included Data are in the form of "modifiedSectionEntry" switches, e.g. "modifiedEducation:" where the data that is included in a specific section is hand set with a number of True/False switches, e.g. for Master_of_Arts, "summary: false". Note: that aside from these "modifiedSectionEntry" switches, currently there are only five other Data switches, all of which include 'non-default' Data in **ALL** Sections of the Element: "includeMinorProjectSourceLink:", "includeCertLinkAndId:", "includeEducationDetailList:", "includeEducationThesisLink:", and "includeAwardsIssuer:"
2. **Section Layout Switches**: These switches control the layout of **ALL** Sections in an Element, i.e. Master of Arts or Calculator Webpage. The two of the most common of these switches are: "sectionDateDivider:" which sets an alternative separator (rather than the default " &amp;ndash; ") between the start and end date Data Entries, e.g. "to". And "includeBackgroundHighlightsTitle:" which add the title "Highlights:" before the list of highlights. </br>
Default behavior is that all layout features effected by Section Layout Switches are excluded. Hence these switches exist to add to or modify the default Sections rather than remove items like the Data switches. </br>
3. **Section Entry Switches**: Each Element has the switch, "skipSectionEntry", that controls what Sections are excluded from an Element, e.g. excluding the "Disciplines" Section from the Skill Set Element. Note: that default is to in include all Sections listed in an Element's Data file. </br>
Some Elements have a second switch like this, namely the Contact Info Element has "skipContactWebsite:" and the Minor Backgrounds Element with "skipMinorProjectCategory:" that exclude other important sub-divisions of data in the Element. 
4. **Resume Content Switches**: By default, **ALL** Elements are included in the Resume and the Template and Data files used to construct each Element are first pulled from the Resume's _includes/_data directories, with any missing made up from the default root _includes/_data directories. Hence these Switches control what Elements are excluded from the Resume, and allow the priority give to Resume's Template/Data files to be overridden, thus replacing the modified Resume Template/Data files with their default counterparts in the root _includes/_data directories.

**Config Resume Content Switch**: The list of all default Resume Elements and their order is set in the Resume's _config.yml file. SEE the "Resume Contents" section of "Config File Setup for the new Resume" below for more on this. 

***For the full list of switches see the "ResumeSwitches.yml" file under the "_supplementalFiles" directory.*** To see exactly what each switch does mechanically, i.e. where they are located in the code, see the Element's template, e.g. _includes/defaultElementTemplates/projectsTemplate.

</br>

## Setting up a New Resume Guide

### Create Resume Files and Directories for the New Resume:
This section covers all additional files that must be created to make a new resume:
***Create Resume Directory***: This directory is placed in the "_resumes" directory and is your "Resume Source Directory" directory from which the resume will be generated. </br>
Resume Directory Contents:
1. **_configs directory**: This is where resume specific config information goes. </br>
This **MUST CONTAIN** a file named "_config.yml" as CreateResumes.sh, **REQUIRES** it. This **MUST CONTAIN** a number of specific config variables for CreateResumes.sh to be able to automatically setup the resume (i.e. add in all modified Data and Template files, as well as any additional resume specific stylesheets and a replacement for the default stylesheet if the user selects one). </br>
**SEE** "_sampleResumeConfigTemplate.yml" in "_supplementalFiles" directory for a full list of the REQUIRED config variables in their default form.
2. **_data and _includes directories**: These contain any modified Data or Template files for the resume. </br>
These **MUST** exist as CreateResumes.sh, **REQUIRES** them; **HOWEVER**, they do NOT need to have any contents. </br>
**NOTE**: In a resume's directory, _data is really a 'config directory' added to the 'website generation' by CreateResumes.sh, and cannot be used at all like the regular _data directory. ***THIS MEANS that all resume Data files are in YAML and must contain a top level YAML object with the same name as the file, i.e. "skillSetData:"***
**SEE** "_ymlDefaultResumeData" in "_supplementalFiles" directory for examples of how YAML modified Data files are formatted.
3. **_outputResumes directory**: This directory is where CreateResumes.sh deposits any PDFs it generated for the Resume. See "CreateResumes.sh" notes below for more on how this directory is used. </br>
**.gitignore**: All of the different resumes should have their "_outputResume" directories ignored by git as their contents are not relevant to the function of the program. For a completed example resume see "exampleCompleteTestResume.pdf" in "_supplementalFiles" directory.
4. **_sass directory**: This directory allows for the resume to have its own ***Resume Styles*** in addition to/modifying, or completely replacing, the default style (i.e. "_sass/defaultStyle.scss"). These additional .scss files are added in alphabetical order by CreateResumes.sh to the "additional_stylesheets:" config option in the resume's config file and from there added by the @import statements in "assets/css/styles.scss" to the resume. **NOTE**: "defaultStyle.scss" is ALWAYS loaded first, meaning that all .scss files in the resume's _sass directory will come after and thus can override the default stylesheet's styles. </br> 
The .scss files placed in the resumes _sass directory can have any name, but for simplicity do NOT use the resume's name (as that could get quite long). </br> 
These .scss files need no specific example. Internally they are standard .scss files. 
5. **index.md**: This is the 'Resume Page' itself. **HOWEVER**, the main use of this page is that in its Jekyll Front Matter (i.e. between the two sets of three dashes) the user can enter any of the Content Switches to modify the output Resume. Note: this is an .md file as .md files do not require 'no-formatting saves' to keep YAML switches with right indentation. </br>
This **MUST** be included and only needs to contain the Jekyll Front matter dashes and the Jekyll/Liquid 'include defaultContent' block. </br>
**SEE** "_sampleIndexTemplate.md" in "_supplementalFiles" directory for example of this.

**Required Naming Conventions**: All Resume directory files, be they Data or Template files, etc. **MUST ADHERE** to the directory/file naming conventions for CreateResumes.sh to work. The **EXCEPTION** to this is the .scss files under the resume's _sass directory, these can have any name desired. </br>
Within a Resume directory, all directories and files are named as if they existed in root directory, i.e. _data, _sass and _includes and not _testData, _xJobData etc. Note that all of these names are 'fake' in the sense that Jekyll doesn't see them as different from any other directory, hence _data is really a 'config directory' and cannot be used at all like the regular _data directory. </br>
File names also **MUST** match root directory names, i.e. contactInfoData.yml and not testContactInfoData.yml. ***This way default templates, data files, etc. share the same name and do not require CreateResumes.sh to try to adjust the names around to get the right files.***

### Resume Config File Setup:
Each resume **MUST** have own config file. This file is mainly used by CreateResume.sh to automatically set a number of resume details based on user inputs to CreateRunner.sh and/or the contents of the various sub-directories in the resume's directory (i.e. _data, _includes, and _sass). ***For the complete details on each of these and how they work in conjunction with CreateResumes.sh and the rest of the program see comments attached to each*** (e.g. **SEE** the comments in "_sampleResumeConfigTemplate.yml" in "_supplementalFiles" directory). </br>
While most of the config variables in the resume config file are automatically generated, however some important options must be hand set:
1. **Resume Contents and Order**: The config variable "default_resume_contents:" is the list of Element Templates used by defaultContents.html to generate the Resume. ***NOTE: This list is the ORDER the Elements will appear in on the Resume. Element order can ONLY be changed from here!***
2. **Google Fonts**: This config variable, "google_fonts:", is a list of all Google Fonts to be added as \<link> tags inside the 'webpage' \<head> in the "defaultHeadContents.html" template. Any fonts that are not "default" to Chrome (such as the "Arial" font used in "defaultStyle.scss") that are used in any of the root or resume stylesheets should be added here.

**Static Options**: Some options, in one of the config files or other specific files, such as "defaultLayout.html" or "assets/css/styles.scss" are noted as STATIC or as 'generally STATIC'. These are options meant to be more or less permanently left alone, e.g. such as "_layouts/defaultLayout.html" or "_includes/defaultPageElements/defaultHeadContents.html", which contains no actual resume content, just the shell of the 'webpage' and some style related elements (such as the font imports). All actual page content comes from index.md so no other/child layouts or 'webpage' heads should be needed. 

**Secret Data File**: Some Data files, namely "contactInfoData.json" has a portion of its data that should be kept "secret", such as phone numbers, email addresses, and locations. These Data files have a corresponding entry in the Data file "_data/secretData.yml" that holds this secret data. This secret Data file is setup like any other YAML Data file in this project, with the "file name" being use as the top level key (though in this case with "SecretData" replacing "Data" in the file name, e.g. contactInfoSecretData). In the future, each Data file with secret data will have its own key in "_data/secretData.yml" so that all secret data can be contained in this single file. The secret Data file is kept "secret" by being included in the git-ignore file so it is **ONLY** local. </br>
The single Template file, "contactInfoData.json", that access the secret Data file is hard-coded to access the YAML object "contactInfoSecretData" within "_data/secretData.yml" and this cannot be changed by either front matter or config variables. </br>
**SEE** "_sampleSecretData.yml" in "_supplementalFiles" directory for example of this.


## Generating a Resume

### CreateResumes.sh:
***Once the above setup is complete***, the program CreateResumes.sh can be used to automatically generate a 'website' for viewing and tweaking the resume, or print the resume to a PDF. </br>
This program's main purpose is to detect and add all resume specific files, such as the resume's own config file, but also any 'modified' data (_data), templates (_includes), and additional styles (_sass) in the resume's directory then automatically add them to the resume's config file before generating the final resume. </br>
CreateResumes.sh takes a number of options which can modify how it works. For example: setting it to add the default data or templates files instead of the resume's specific files, or swapping out the main stylesheet "defaultStyle.scss" for a  resume specific version. </br>
**SEE** "Using CreateResumes.sh" below for more one each of the different options for CreateResumes.sh. </br>
When run in 'viewing' mode, i.e. without the [-p, --print] flag, the 'website' is deployed with the Jekyll Serve "--livereload" flag, allowing the modifications to all files aside from config files to be immediately applied to the 'website' when the file is saved. Thus allowing for easier modification of the resume towards its final form. </br>
Once all editing is completed the web-server the 'website' is running on **MUST** be closed with: CTRL + C. Note that the web-server is automatically closed by CreateResumes.sh when it prints to PDF.

#### Notes on how CreateResumes.sh works:
* The basic function of CreateResumes.sh can best be seen in how it gets the 'website' to generate with the resume specific files rather than the default ones. for template files, it does this by adding the necessary YAML to the "modified_resume_templates:" config variable in the resume's config file. This tells the "resumeContent.html" template what templates to use for each Element of the resume (modified or default). Modified Data works similarly with each Element template looking to the "modified_resume_data:" config variable that is set by CreateResumes.sh to see what data file to use when generating its Element. Additional stylesheets have some extra config variables that must be set but essentially work the same as above, but with "assets/css/styles.scss" using the "additional_stylesheets:" config variable set by CreateResumes.sh to add each stylesheet.
* In the case of the resume's 'Data files' (which are really additional config files themselves), CreateResumes.sh adds these modified "data" files as additional config file alongside the resume's own config file to the Jekyll command it uses to generate the 'website'. (Note: this is done like this as this is the only way to have resume specific 'data' files).

#### Print-to-PDF with the --print Flag:
When "CreateResumes.sh" is run in 'print' mode, i.e. it is given the [-p, --print] flag, it will run Print-to-PDF once 'website' is setup then automatically shut the 'website' down and end the program. This allows a PDF to be created quickly once the resume is fully setup (i.e. all data, templates, front matter variables, etc. are set to produce the desired Resume).
**SEE** "exampleCompleteTestResume.pdf" in "_supplementalFiles/_exampleOutput" directory for example of a default resume with all data entries filled.

### Using CreateResumes.sh:
CreateResumes.sh **MUST** be run in project root to function correctly. Files are output from CreateResumes.sh with file names in the following format: "TestResume_24-10-31_14:02:24" into the resume's "_outputResumes" directory; both file names and output location are hard-coded. (Filename generation is hard-coded so that any number of resumes can be generated without any having matching filenames and so that they will be organized from oldest to newest).

| **Usage**:                  |                                                                                                                  |
| --------------------------- | ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| CreateResumes.sh            | [--help] [-i DIRS, --ignore DIRS] [-p, --print] [-r FILE, --replace-main-stylesheet FILE] [-s DIR, --source DIR] |
| ***Close the Web-Server***: | CTRL + C                                                                                                         |

| **Options**:                                                   |                                                                                                                                                                               |
| -------------------------------------------------------------- | ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| --help &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; | Display help message                                                                                                                                                          |
| -i, --ignore                                                   | Ignore resume DIRS when generating and use default directories instead. ARG: comma separated list of resume directories to ignore, e.g. '_data,_templates,_sass'              |
| -p, --print                                                    | Print-to-PDF resume, then end program                                                                                                                                         |
| -r, --replace-main-stylesheet                                  | Replace default resume stylesheet, 'defaultStyle.scss', with FILE. ARG: FILE is the name of a stylesheet in the root '_sass' directory without extension, e.g. 'defaultStyle' |
| -s, --source                                                   | Set source resume directory to DIR. ARG: DIR is the name of a directory in the '_resumes' directory, e.g. '_testResume'                                                       |

| **Examples**:             |                                              |
| ------------------------- | -------------------------------------------- |
| **Generate for Viewing**: | bash CreateResumes.sh -s _testResume         |
| **Print-to-PDF**:         | bash CreateResumes.sh -s _testResume --print |
